The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Fairy and the Witch, by A. D. Nelson


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Fairy and the Witch


Author: A. D. Nelson



Release Date: September 13, 2020  [eBook #63192]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIRY AND THE WITCH***


E-text prepared by Mary Glenn Krause, David E. Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/fairywitch00nels


Transcriber’s note:

      Italicized or underlined text is surrounded by
      underscores: _italics_.

      Emboldened text is surrounded by equals signs: =bold=.





THE FAIRY AND THE WITCH

by

A. D. NELSON.


[Illustration]


Price 15 Cents

Eldridge Entertainment House
Franklin, Ohio


      *      *      *      *      *      *

--HERE ARE--

SOME OF OUR VERY NEW TITLES


It is always a satisfaction to be the first to get hold of new and
novel entertainments, and here is =YOUR= chance:


PLAYS FOR FEMALE CHARACTERS

  Aunt Deborah’s First Luncheon                    25c
  When Shakespeare Struck The Town                 25c
  Ye Tea Party of Ye Olden Time                    25c


TWO CLEVER MUSICAL PLAYS FOR CHILDREN

  Under The Sugar Plum Tree                        40c
  In Little Folks Town                             40c


TWO NEW MOCK TRIALS

  Father Time’s Christmas Trial                    15c
  Will Soakum’s Matrimonial Bureau                 25c


THREE SPLENDID BOOKS

  Dramatic Stories, Myths and Legends      { Paper 35c; Boards 50c
    For Children--The Stage or School Room {

  Good Stunts for Commencement Week                50c
    Novelties That Will Enliven This Festive Occasion

  What to Say for Closing Day                      30c
    Good Dialogs, Exercises, Etc. for Closing Day.


  SEND ORDERS TO
  ELDRIDGE ENTERTAINMENT HOUSE
  Franklin, Ohio

      *      *      *      *      *      *


THE FAIRY AND THE WITCH

An allegorical sketch for Hallowe’en, in which is
related the fall of Black Witch and the
rise of White Fairy.

by

 A. D. NELSON.






Copyright, 1915, Eldridge Entertainment House.

ELDRIDGE ENTERTAINMENT HOUSE.
FRANKLIN, OHIO.




PROPERTIES.


  One black kettle or cauldron, of iron.

  One tripod constructed of rough sticks about 2 inches in diameter and
  fastened at top by wire, chain or rope from which kettle is hung.

  One wand for White Fairy.

  One Black Rod for the Witch, to be so constructed that it will break
  into two pieces at will.

  One contrivance for making a light appear in witch’s kettle at will.

  An organ or piano for music, off stage, if desired where indicated in
  lines of play.




CHARACTERS.


_White Fairy_--an older child, female.

_Black Witch_--adult, female, or an additional effectiveness can be
made in the denouement if this be impersonated by a male, speaking in a
shrill high-pitched falsetto.

_Mirth_--First Fairy Messenger, child, male or female.

_Jollity_--Second Fairy Messenger, child, male or female.

_Erebus_--Imp of Blackness, child, male or female.

_Noctis_--Black Fury of Night, child, male or female.

_The Children_--in any number.




COSTUMES.


Conventional costume for White Fairy; also conventional witch costume
for Black Witch with addition of black mask and hood for face and back
of head to conceal identity. The witch costume to be so constructed
that it can be easily removed.

Fairy Messengers clad in white or some diaphanous drapery of light blue
or pink.

Erebus and Noctis costumes, black, armless inverted sacks running from
a point above head to a fullness at shoes with eye-holes, etc., cut in
proper place.

Children costumes, as they may be dressed.




The Fairy and The Witch.


  (_Scene: A clearing in the forest, with Witch’s kettle suspended on
  tripod near the Right Front of Stage. No scenery is necessary but an
  added effectiveness can be secured if play is given out of doors._)

  (_Enter White Fairy from back of stage, to accompaniment of light,
  lilting music if desired. White Fairy in pantomime casts spell over
  region by tripping lightly to right of stage and waving wand, thence
  over kettle, thence to front, thence to left. Exit White Fairy at
  rear, music ceases._)

  (_Enter Black Witch from left, plods toward kettle chuckling
  fiendishly. Bends over kettle, presumably examining it, then moves
  towards left across front of stage during reading of lines._)

_Black Witch_ (_boastfully_) Mistress of this black night am I. Witch
and wizard of all the powers of night and darkness I am. Supreme
above all good in the Spirit World, tonight on mundane earth. I come
to work my spell and my skill in arts malign display. Not all the
holy saints, who tomorrow rule the day, can wrest from me my power of
night--Hallowe’en! (_in derision_) A hallowed evening! Oh, ho, ho! Ah,
ha, ha!! From that proud eminence brought low by me and now decreed to
devilish deeds and dark! Thus shall it ever be. (_Calling toward left,
off stage._) Come now my hosts of somber reputation. Make merry! With
fell design make we night hideous. Come Owl and hoot for me! (_Listens,
no response, calls louder._) Come Owl! Hoot Owl! (_Owl hoots off stage,
left. Aside, chuckling._) Didst hear the old fool hoot? (_Calling owl_)
Come nearer Owl, perch thou upon my shoulder. (_Owl hoots again very
faintly. Pleading_) Come Owl, Owl come! (_No response. Grows slightly
alarmed. Muses_) What portends this? Am I now to lose my power as Jove
hath so long menaced? Owl has fled and will not come to me. (_Pauses,
resumes hopefully_) Ah, well, in my train come others who will heed and
answer me. This night Black Witch must have her way!

  (_During next lines while calling upon her hosts the Witch moves to
  and fro calling toward different sections of the region as taste may
  dictate except as indicated with the lines._)

_Black Witch_ Black Cat, most common beast of evil augury, what sayest
thou? Come forth Black Cat. Let thy penetrating howl echo through the
wood. Roost thou upon my back. Come Black Cat, oh! Black Cat come!
(_Pauses, looks expectantly toward tree, no response. Then muses a
trifle sadly._) Ah! ’tis indeed a night of evil omen when my own Black
Cat forsaketh me. (_Turning hopefully_) Raven! Thou bird of sable
plumage, bleak and drear, hear thy mistress call. Sound thy raucous
note athwart the evening air. Come Raven! bear me company. (_Pauses,
no response. Despairingly_) Raven too is gone and will not heed my
voice. (_Brightening_) Oh! well, not yet do we despair, with ill intent
and fury unabated call we yet others! (_From front center of stage
directly facing audience._) Come snake! sleek-bellied serpent, curse
of women, cursed by men, come forth my own beloved. (_Drags point of
cane, wiggling, along ground from stage front towards self._) Start
from thy hole, oh! snake of mine. Let thy rattling hisses be heard
among the leaves. Coil clammily around me! (_Pauses, no response,
resumes furiously_) Seven curses be upon thee, pampered pet of Eve,
and thou wilt not come! (_Turns away in despair and next calls with
rather hopeless air._) Jackal, night prowler of the forest, hast thou
joined this motley crew of renegades? (_Pleadingly_) Heed my voice, oh!
Jackal! Prithee leave thy secret lair; come forth! Strike thy eerie
call weird and dominant! Soft-footed creep through the forest aisles
reposing at my feet. (_Pauses, no response, resumes furiously._) Keep
to thy den accursed beast forever! Rot and die!

_Black Witch_ (_Musing sadly_) Even yet, methinks, I must rely upon my
frisky imps of darkness to aid in this foul festival! (_Again brightens
hopefully, exclaims_) But no! But no!

  (_At this line Black Witch should be near front of stage at point
  directly in front of place where Mirth will enter. During next lines
  Black Witch raises arms aloft in supplication and backs toward place
  of Mirth’s entrance._)

_Black Witch_ (_Moving backwards, hands aloft in earnest
supplication._) Come, Wind of night! oh, Night Wind come! Thy blasting
fury loose upon this world! (_Pauses, drops arms, no response, again
muses sadly._) Ah! Wind of Night, on which I’ve drifted through the sky
these thousand years, hast thou too deserted me? (_Again raises arms
aloft and cries in desperation_) Will none come forth to do my will?

  (_Enter Mirth, silently, directly behind Black Witch. Remains behind
  B. W. and out of her sight, dogging her footsteps, poking fun at her,
  making grimaces, etc._)

_Black Witch_ (_Moving towards kettle soliloquizing brokenly_) Ah,
mighty Jove, hast thou delivered me unto mine enemies on this dark
night of all dark nights?--Some one has cast a spell upon the place and
for the moment I am powerless--Aye! for the moment! (_looks at her rod
as if conscious of it for the first time_) But I have still my trusty
rod of black, and it will yet dispel this impotence oppressive--Though
my voice fail this rod will fail me not!

  (_Makes passes over kettle with rod and turning slightly catches
  sight of Mirth._)

_Black Witch_ (_Rather amused as if White Fairy were a foe of small
consequence._) Ah, ha! White Fairy is now revealed as Jove’s agent
to work my ruin and she hath sent Mirth, her messenger, to haunt my
footsteps and bedevil me! (_chuckles, then calls_) Come Erebus, Imp of
Blackness, come! Make haste and drive this Mirth away.

  (_Erebus groans, off stage, left_)

  (_Enter Erebus from left, treading slowly and heavily_)

_Black Witch_ What ails thee, Imp of Blackness?

_Erebus_ (_Yawning_) I sleep and cannot wake. My feet drag like lead
behind me. (_groans_) My eyes will not open and my body wilts in sleep.

_Black Witch_ (_Musing_) It is the dread fairy spell! (_severely to
Erebus_) Cease thy deep grumblings and drive Mirth away from here.

  (_Erebus takes after Mirth. Mirth tripping lightly, Erebus dragging
  himself along heavily._)

  (_Exeunt Erebus and Mirth to back of stage._)

_Black Witch_ (_Calling, toward left_) Come also Noctis, Black Fury of
the night, come too! Speed thee hence. Lend thy brother aid.

  (_Enter Noctis, moaning and yawning, also treading heavily as if in a
  stupor._)

_Noctis_ (_Lifelessly_) Did call me, mother Witch?

_Black Witch_ (_Sharply_) I did, and art thou also sodden with a heavy
stupor?

_Noctis_ (_Trembling_) I am, dread mother Witch. My eyes refuse to open
and my feet will not obey my will.

_Black Witch_ (_Impatiently_) Cease thy grumblings and be thankful that
you live.

  (_Enter Erebus from back moving with crestfallen air towards witch._)

_Black Witch_ Even now methinks almighty Jove hath delivered this
region to White Fairy and our course is run. (_turns to Erebus_) Did
Mirth escape thee? (_Erebus bows head_) Sodden Imp! (_to both_) But
come, let us brew our witch’s brew. Gather around and with mighty magic
incantation will we boil a brew to blight the world.

  (_Enter Mirth and Jollity from back as Black Witch, Erebus and Noctis
  move toward kettle. Mirth and Jollity dog footsteps of the three,
  remaining out of sight poking fun at Witch, etc. Black Witch, Erebus
  and Noctis begin to spread out around kettle while Black Witch makes
  few passes with wand. She catches sight of Mirth and Jollity and
  screeches._)

_Black Witch_ (_Screeching_) Erebus and Noctis! fly after these unholy
imps of light!

  (_Erebus and Noctis pursue Mirth and Jollity, the fairy messengers
  tripping lightly, Erebus and Noctis following heavily. Exeunt, the
  four, to back of stage._)

_Black Witch_ (_following a few steps_) Fly, fly! Let not your
footsteps laggard be. Capture them and, returning hence, let their
bones and flesh serve but to fill the pot. (_Turns toward kettle,
chuckling with glee._) Oh, ho, ho! Ah, ha, ha! Two fairy messengers
to grace the witch’s brew. Fine will be the scent as their bones are
burned and flesh is boiled into the stew! (_Turning_) Erebus and
Noctis, fail me not!

  (_Enter Erebus and Noctis returning from chase empty handed, from
  back of stage._)

_Black Witch_ Didst let them escape thee, dull imps?

_Erebus and Noctis_ (_heads hanging_) Aye, dread mother.

_Black Witch_ (_Beating Erebus and Noctis about shoulders with rod_)
Stupid dullards! Worthless laggards! See that ye fail me not again!
(_Indignant_) Come with me and gather ’round the cauldron.

  (_They move over to kettle and take positions around it. Black Witch
  makes passes with rod and at signal from Black Witch all three chant
  chorus of incantation song. The solo stanzas of this song, also the
  chorus are to be droned out in a slow, sing-song chant, no particular
  tune or melody desired. Make it as weirdly unmusical and inharmonious
  as possible, but let the words “get across” distinctly._)

_Chorus_ (_Black Witch, Erebus and Noctis, while moving around the
kettle circling slowly._)

  We’re watching the pot and it’s going to boil;
  The air will get hot and this region will spoil,
  But that matters not for we brew witches’ oil.

  (_Stop circling. Black Witch waves rod. She reaches over and fingers
  the head of Erebus, tosses hand toward cauldron. Repeats process with
  Noctis. The three immediately resume circling around kettle while
  Black Witch sings first stanza in solo._)

_Black Witch_ (_solo chant_)

  1 A louse and a lizard
    And two babies fair;
    The brains of a pole-cat,
    Some coyote’s hair;
    Animals, reptiles
    And birds of the air,
    We take of their entrails
    And stir them with care.

_Chorus_ (_the three, still circling_)

  We’re watching the pot and it’s going to boil,
  The air will get hot and this region will spoil,
  But that matters not for we brew witches’ oil.

  (_All cease circling at conclusion of this chorus. Black Witch to be
  behind kettle facing audience. Erebus and Noctis on each side. While
  Black Witch sings next stanza the three sway back and forth but do
  not circle around._)

_Black Witch_ (_solo chants_)

  2 To those must be added
    The element, strife;
    Some envy and malice--
    The ills of our life--
    Vengeance and jealousy,
    Backbiting, lies,
    All put in the kettle
    With things we despise!

  (_The three immediately begin circling again and chant chorus._)

_All_ We’re watching the pot and it’s going to boil,
      The air will get hot and this region----

_Black Witch_ (_Interrupting hysterically and shaking rod menacingly
towards Erebus and Noctis in turn._) Curses upon thee, torpid imps!
Canst not chant with thy wonted vim? Let thy voices swell to the far
gods, else will sovereign Jove hear us not. Raise thy voices. I command
thee!

  (_The three resume circling and re-commence the chorus, Erebus and
  Noctis chanting louder._)

  _All_ We’re watching the pot and it’s going to boil,
        The air will get hot and this region will spoil,
        But that matters not for we----

_Black Witch_ (_Interrupting by beating the kettle with rod and
screaming furiously_) Curses upon thee, dead! black! pot!!

  (_Enter White Fairy at back of stage at word “pot”. Fairy raises
  wand. Light appears inside of kettle as Black Witch beats it, to be
  so timed that the glow appears at instant White Fairy raises wand._)

_Black Witch_ (_screaming triumphantly_) Ha! ha! it comes! Light
comes--light make fire--come fire--fire come!

_White Fairy_ (_coming forward and interrupting_) Stop! I command thee,
stop!

  (_Erebus and Noctis shiver, moan and fall prone on the ground,
  remaining there until told to fly by Black Witch._)

_Fairy_ (_From position a trifle to the left and back of kettle, gazing
steadily at Witch, ignoring imps._) This night thou art delivered unto
me.

_Black Witch_ (_moving toward Fairy_) Not so, not so, loathed Fairy.
Though ages old I still am young and thou shalt not prevail.

_Fairy_ (_calmly_) Thy power is gone----

_Black Witch_ (_Interrupting in derision_) Not yet, dear Fairy!
(_continues with air of triumph_) See yonder glow in my black pot? With
my rod I brought it and it will burn and brighten until thee and thine
consumed and parched be, and the whole world blighted. This rod, my
power, though it weakened be, is potent still and thou canst do naught
against me----

_Fairy_ (_Interrupting with cool hauteur_) That light is mine. I caused
it there. Forever it will glow--a fairy gleam to light and bless the
world. Thy power is gone, thy rod is dead.

  (_Black Witch begins to laugh scornfully, moves over and gazes into
  pot, is startled and laugh is choked down._)

_Black Witch_ (_murmuring hopelessly_) ’Tis true. ’Tis true.

  (_Black Witch grows afraid, moves away from kettle towards left
  across front of stage, muttering. Fairy maintains her original
  position but turns around slowly following movements of Black Witch
  with her eye. Fairy makes passes with wand toward Black Witch. Black
  Witch trembles and becomes furiously enraged._)

_Black Witch_ (_hysterically_) Begone, foul fairy, ere I smite thee
dead!

_Fairy_ (_Calmly_) Do thy worst. Thy worst is less than none.

  (_Black Witch grows desperate, approaches White Fairy and raises rod
  to strike her. At this moment B. W. should be to left of Fairy._)

_Black Witch_ With mine omnipotent rod I kill thee!

  (_Fairy smiles, holds forth her wand. Arms of Black Witch become
  rigid in mid-air._)

_Black Witch_ (_screaming_) Fly Erebus and Noctis, Imps of Blackness,
for your lives make haste! Away! Away!

  (_Exeunt Erebus and Noctis to back passing to the right and behind
  Witch and Fairy._)

_White Fairy_ (_still smiling_) Break rod, rod break!

  (_Touches rod with wand, rod breaks._)

_White Fairy_ (_slightly toward audience_) And thus shall broken be her
power forevermore.

  (_White Fairy waves her wand toward Black Witch, Black Witch
  trembles, groans, broken piece of rod falls from her hand._)

_Black Witch_ (_muttering_) ’Tis true. ’Tis true. Jove hath forsaken
me and aids this young sprite to do me harm---- (_words trail off into
silence as White Fairy continues to wave wand_.)

_White Fairy_ (_Low and rather sadly_) Thy lips are silent now forever.
Now thou must sleep--sleep witch, no longer witch.

  (_White Fairy continues to wave wand slowly. Black Witch nods head
  drowsily, wilts into sleep and falls to ground._)

_White Fairy_ Thou hast fallen. A deeper sleep is thine than fell upon
the Imps of Blackness. Sleep forever--wake no more!

  (_Black Witch exhales one last breath. Dies._)

_White Fairy_ (_solemnly_) Thine is a sleep eternal. Thou art dead.

  (_White Fairy gives one last pitiful look at dead Witch, then turns
  away smiling._)

_White Fairy_ (_calling_) Come Mirth and Jollity! Come, children, come.

  (_Mirth and Jollity and children, come tripping in with exclamations
  of childish delight, etc., until they spy the dead Witch; then their
  cries are hushed, their tripping ceases and they move furtively on
  tip-toe over to White Fairy glancing at her for explanations._)

_White Fairy_ Black Witch is dead. Her power is gone, and Hallowe’en
shall always be a hallowed evening--holy night! redeemed from evil by
the power of light. Let men rejoice and women sing. Let children play
and dance. This night, henceforth, is sacred to the joys of children.

  (_Children clap hands in applause._)

_White Fairy_ Come! let us dance.

  (_Music starts up. Any lively dance song for children such as can be
  found in any school music book will be suitable here. All clasp hands
  and begin to circle around kettle, singing and dancing. Music breaks
  off and all stop singing abruptly in middle of first stanza. Children
  all glance towards dead Witch then towards Fairy._)

_White Fairy_ What is it, children?

_Mirth_ Good Fairy, we want no one to die.

_White Fairy_ (_touching Mirth with wand_) Bless you, dear messenger of
mine, but the witch is evil and cannot live.

_Jollity_ Can’t you give the witch her life but keep her evil power
away from her?

_Children_ (_in unison_) Please good Fairy, restore the Witch’s life!
Please oh! please.

_White Fairy_ (_pondering_) Your pleas move me. I will restore the
witch’s life. In Spirit world she can no longer live. A mortal, she
must dwell upon the earth.

  (_Children cluster in “background” as Fairy goes toward Witch._)

_White Fairy_ (_touching Witch with wand_) Insensate clay awake! Moved
by the tears of children, whom thou hast terrified and wronged, I give
thee life. Thou canst no longer dwell with spirits. Wake in mortal form!

  (_Witch begins to show signs of life as White Fairy continues to wave
  wand._)

_White Fairy_ (_Resuming_) Too long hast thou disgraced thy sex in
Spirit World, in mortal life thou shalt assume the guise of man.

  (_During preceding lines Witch must unfasten necessary strings,
  hooks, etc., to allow entire costume to fall off as she rises. Fairy
  reads next line upon receiving signal from Witch that all is ready._)

_White Fairy_ (_stepping back and raising wand_) Rise mortal man.

  (_Mortal rises, children cheer._)

_White Fairy_ (_Continuing_) Be grateful for thy life.

  Note--If part of Witch is played by female omit this line and change
  words to feminine gender in following lines where necessary. In the
  original production the Witch was effectively impersonated by a young
  man thus bringing out a stronger anti-climax upon restoration to life.

_Mortal_ (_bowing_) I am grateful.

  (_Fairy disposes of wand by hanging it on her dress._)

_White Fairy_ Thy life is due these children. See thou be good to them
else will thy life be forfeited to me again. Love them, I command thee.

_Mortal_ (_bowing low and gently kissing Fairy’s hand_) I will love
them and obey thee, most gracious majesty.

  (_White Fairy and Mortal clasp hands and turn toward audience._)

_White Fairy_ Thus ever shall the powers of night and darkness be
dispelled.

_Mortal_ And good will triumph over evil everywhere.

  (_They bow to audience and to each other._)

_White Fairy_ Will dance with us, my Lord?

_Mortal_ Your majesty doth honor me.

  (_All join hands circling around kettle and sing dance song. Organ
  glides into march at end. All march off, Fairy and Mortal in lead,
  then Mirth and Jollity, followed by children. Exunt all._)


CURTAIN.




TWO PLAYS FOR BOYS

By SEYMOUR S. TIBBALS.


Mr. Tibbals has been unusually successful in furnishing boys’ plays
that introduce characters true to life. While the plays are strong and
forceful in the lessons they teach, clean comedy predominates and the
boys like them.


“The Millionaire Janitor”

A comedy in two acts. Here is a rollicking play for eight or more boys
with plenty of action. Just the thing for a Boys’ Class or Junior
Y.M.C.A. Easily staged and costumed. Opportunity for introduction of
musical numbers and recitations. By introducing such features the play
may be used for an entire evening’s entertainment.

  Price 25 Cents


“Up Caesar’s Creek”

A splendid play for any number of boys. The characters are real boys
and the play deals with their experiences while camping up Caesar’s
Creek the performance closing with a minstrel show in camp. Costumes
and scenery are not elaborate and the play may be produced on any stage.

  Price 25 Cents

These comedies are protected by copyright, but permission for amateur
production is granted with the purchase of the book.


  ELDRIDGE ENTERTAINMENT HOUSE
  Franklin, Ohio




“_THE HOUSE THAT HELPS_”


WE ARE SPECIALISTS IN

Amateur Entertainments

  It is not a side line with us, but we devote our entire time to that
    business

Realizing that many people have grown weary of searching through
catalogs and reading entertainments only to discard them as unavailable
we appreciate the fact that our customers have often spoken of us as
“the house that helps.” We have had practical experience in selecting
and producing amateur entertainments and we feel that we know what will
please the public, and what can be produced under certain conditions.
=Our experience is at your disposal.= Write us, giving full particulars
of your special need in the way of an entertainment, and we will select
a play, an operetta, a drill or even an entire program for you. =But
always enclose a stamp for the reply.=

=Remember=, that in addition to our entertainments we carry a
large line of publications of other dealers. If in doubt as to the
entertainment you desire, send particulars and we will suggest
something to fit.

We are at your service.


  ELDRIDGE ENTERTAINMENT HOUSE
  Franklin, Ohio




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIRY AND THE WITCH***


******* This file should be named 63192-0.txt or 63192-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/1/9/63192


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

